---
title: Choosing statistical software packages for education in the social sciences
author: Thomas de Graaf
date: '2017-08-12'
slug: choosing-statistical-software-package-for-education-in-the-social-sciences
categories:
  - Reproducability
  - Education
tags: []
---

## Introduction: the empirical workflow 

>Econometrics is much easier without the data---Marno Verbeek

The quote above does not only apply to economics and econometrics, but
to all of the social sciences in general. Empirical research---that is,
dealing with data in all its forms---requires a rigorous approach, even
more so, with the increasing emphasis on openness and reproducibility of
all kinds of scientific research. Therefore, it is strange that in
academic education there is not much guidance in choosing which research
tools to use and in the philosophy behing choosing an efficient and
reproducable workflow.[^1]

This note deals with the suitability of various software packages for
applying applied econometrics in specific and data science in
general.[^2] Specifically, In will focus on STATA, R and Python.[^3] I
will not say which tool to use. Instead, I will focus on the various
strengths and weaknessess of each software package combined with it
specific approach. The main elements I will consider are the package
suitability for education and how well it can be integrated in an
efficient workflow. The former is mostly important for doing (small)
data exercises, whilst the latter is vital for larger research project,
such as theses and later on perhaps research papers.

To illustrate why the concept of reproducibility is vital, note that a
typical empirical workflow in the social sciences looks as follows:

Generate data

:   Data is read from an external source (recording, questionnaire, file
    or online database) or is simulated.

Manipulate data

:   This is usually the most time demanding phase[^4] and includes
    (amongst many other things) manipulating missing data, merging data
    and relabeling data

Analyse data

:   This phase includes not only standard ecometrics and statistical or
    machine learning techniques, but as well as graphical
    representations as maps and figures.

Present results

:   Finally, documents in the forms of papers, posters, theses, or
    presentations have to be drafted. Note that ideally one wants to do
    so in various formats, such as in pdf for physical papers and in
    html for web display.

Unfortunately, all these steps do not necessarily run sequentially in
time. Supervisors, referees, colleagues, and the future you, always want
to add or delete elements to or from your research. For instance,
variables have to be added, model specifications have to be checked, and
3D pie charts have to be changed in something useful.[^5]

Therefore, it is vital that all these steps are both (*i*) very well
documented so that the future you can easily retrace your steps,
implement changes and redo the whole research if needed, and (*ii*) well
connected to each other. The latter does not necessarily entail that the
whole research should be done in one software environment, but instead
that the outcome of one research step (e.g., generating data) can easily
serve as an input for another step (e.g., data manipulation).

In the next section I will lay out the strengths and weaknesses of three
statistical software packages with this workflow in mind. Subsequently,
I discuss the suitability of each package in teaching and, thereafter, I
conclude with some more general comments.

## Statistical software packages 

I review the various packages according to several criteria. There are
several others that will be discussed, but these I find most important
for a suitable software package to be used for teaching in the social
sciences.

Open source

:   The most important argument to use an open source package is
    reproducibility. Your work is simply less accessible and thus
    reproducible if the code can only be run with applications that
    costs over .

Learning curve

:   First, and foremost, students should be able to use the package for
    straightforward econometric research. If that is not possible after
    one six-week's course, the software package is not particularly
    suitable.

Size of the community

:   Nobody wants to be locked in with obsolete technology. A large
    userbase ensures a high probability that the software package will
    be used and maintained in the future as well. Moreover, all sorts of
    indirect effects, such as user written routines, packages and
    documentation, come along for free with a large community.

Usefulness outside academia

:   Often forgotten as an argument but outside academic life, some
    applications are more used than others. And with the recent emphasis
    on better preparation for the labor market, this argument seems to
    become more important. By the way, the application still mostly used
    would be the ubiquitous Excel and its related visual basic language.

Flexibility

:   Ideally, a software approach should be both extendable and scalable.
    The former ensures that slight deviations from standard approaches
    can relatively easy be implemented. The latter is important when the
    size of the database increases, as typically is the case with recent
    improvements in remote sensing techniques.

Scriptable

:   Finally, a software package should be scriptable---both internally
    as externally. Internally scriptable indicates that within the
    package scripts or programs can be written so that every step within
    the workflow can be reproduced. With externally scriptable I mean
    that the software package should also be used in combination with
    other software packages or languages, such as LaTeX, markdown, make,
    html, sql, C++, etc.

Other software packages that I will not review, typically score badly on
more than one of these criteria. For example, SPSS is proprietary
software, which has some issues with scriptability and is not very
flexible. Moreover, a sizeable part of the user community moved over to
other software packages (most notably R). Other software packages I will
not review for reasons of similarity (such as Matlab to some extent) or
my lack of experience with them (most notably SAS).[^6]

## STATA

STATA is proprietary software copyrighted by the StataCorp LLC
corporation.[^7] It is especially popular among economists, although the
growth of STATA seems almost comparable with that of R (Python is in its
own league, however).[^8]

The biggest comparative advantage of STATA is its learning curve
(although some students might disagree). It is relatively
straightforward to teach students basic econometrics (including time
series, panel data and count data techniques, discrete choice models and
duration models). Indeed, STATA has the advantage of being one of the
only tools dedicated to econometric research. While it is not so
flexible, it is often possible (and simple) to apply cutting-edge models
and other techniques. For example, regressing `y` on `x1` and `x2` can
simply be stated as:

    reg y x1 x2


Moreover, you can do so in a structured way by writing scripts (the
so-called do files). Many students appreciate as well the fact that
STATA command can be given interactively (via a drop-down menu) of
directly from the console enabling them to memorize the various commands
on the fly.

There is a large STATA community. This ensures the availability of many
useful so-called user-written routines and tutorial material, whether
via Youtube or in pdf (there is a STATA journal). The STATA community is
not only huge, but as well very helpful (although the help documentation
is oftentimes cumbersome). The first hit on Google on a sometimes not
very focused question usually suffices.

Unfortunately, not many organizations outside academia use
STATA---although I heard recently that some Danish consultancy agencies
in Denmark do. Most organizations now typically use R or Python in
combination with even more focused software applications as Hadoop or
Julia (again, apart from Excel). Usually, this does not matter much as
programming skills are easily transferable, but, unfortunately, the
STATA language is hardly a programming language. Instead, it is more a
sequence of very specific commands. Therefore, it is hard to relate the
commands to something as Python.

Another downside is the flexibility of STATA. For procedures that
slightly deviate from the 'basic' ones[^9], STATA can give you a hard
time. Mostly, because the source code is not known, working with
matrices is cumbersome (to say the least) and the number of programming
tools is rather limited. Moreover, STATA can only work with one active
dataset, which makes merging datasets sometimes difficult. Finally,
although there are some plugins, STATA is not designed for working with
data stored on servers somewhere else via application programming
interfaces (API's). Unfortunately, working via API's[^10] becomes
increasingly important, if not only for the recent surge in open access
data via local governments, Google, Twitter, Foursquare, etc.

STATA itself is well scriptable internally. although it is less
programming and more sequencing commands, for the majority of research
projects this is definitely good enough. Externally, however, there are
other issues which has to do with its proprietary nature. Other
applications, such as great ?nix utilities as make and pandoc but as
well git and github have difficulties 'communicating' with STATA. It is
possible, however, to export from STATA to other formats, especially to
ubiquitous text files format, which enables automatic generation of
LaTeXÂ tables.

Finally, alas, STATA is not open source. This hinders reproducibility,
insight in the source code ("How the hell did they do that?") as well as
the transferability of data (the STATA .dta dataformat is not accessible
to read directly, although many other packages, including R, have
created special read procedures for STATA dataformats).

## R 

R emerged in 1995 as the open-source (GNU) version of the S language and
quickly surpassed its predecessor in popularity.[^11] R itself consists
of a base distribution which can be enhanced with packages, and it is
exactly the ease of writing, distributing and using packages that makes
R so attractive for many users. At the moment there are more than 10,000
packages on the official CRAN website, but Github contains many
more.[^12]

Because of its open-source nature and its large and very active
community, the quality of most of the packages is almost guaranteed.
Indeed, if there are killer applications in the data science world, then
R has most of them, with as most notifiable examples dplyr for quick and
robust data manipulation and ggplot2 for structural plotting using the
*grammar of graphics* approach as advocated by @wilkinson2006grammar and
implemented by @wickham2013implementation.

The learning curve of R is however steeper than that of STATA.[^13]
Having said that, learning basic R is still relatively quick (and
accessible) and can be done in a short time with great free online
courses. Today, teaching Stata to students requires at least one
tutorial class, where teaching R can---theoretically, at least--- be
self-contained.

Typically, R is characterized as:

>R is written by statisticians, for statisticians.

Unfortunately, this can be seen in the R language itself. Best described
as 'quirky', the R language is not the most beautiful or best designed
programming language. For example, usually there is more than one (often
actually more than three) ways to accomplish something, which leads to a
myriad of styles and types of coding. In applied statistics, though, R
shines. Although slightly more cumbersome than STATA, commands for basic
econometric techniques are relatively straightforward. Estimating a
linear regression simply looks as follows:

```r
# ordinary least squares regression
model <- lm(y ~ x1 + x2, data = data1)
summary(model)
```

Note the difference with STATA, where in STATA one simply uses
`reg y x1 x2`. However, in R one can store everything in an object (in
this case the object "model") and use it later, and one can use several
databases ('dataframes') at the same time. Both features are extremely
useful for dealing with larger research projects. And although STATA
still is more straightforward in basic econometrics, R users have
developed several packages to emulate STATA's ease of use.[^14]

Because R is very flexible and the community is that huge (across
disciplines as well), for almost every (statistical) problem a package
most likely is developed (if feasible). The problem is, however, that
terminology with respect to models differs across fields. Moreover, what
economists find important (causality anyone?) is generally less
important within biometrics, physics, statistics of sociology. So, using
R also means spending a great deal of time finding and checking the
correct package.[^15]

If anything, R if flexible in terms of what it can do. Spatial data
analysis, Bayesian inference, optimization, network analysis and---above
all---producing wonderful plots that can even be used as interactive web
applications. Therefore, it is used intensively outside academia as well
by large companies such as Facebook, Google, Twitter, Microsoft,
Booking.com, Uber and Airbnb, mainly for 'quick and dirty' data science
and data and output visualization.

Unfortunately, R is not very scalable, as only internal computer memory
(RAM) is used for data storage (similar to matlab, STATA and comparable
languages). There are ways to circumvent this (typically in combination
with other languages, such as Hadoop or using parallel computing
techniques), but it is cumbersome for very large research projects with
huge amounts of data (remote sensing data in geographical analysis comes
to mind or up to 100 million records when using micro data).

Finally, R is extremely scriptable, both internally and externally.
Internally, the R language is a full blow object-oriented language,
although perhaps not the most beautiful one. Especially the ease of
writing and reading packages is very useful for groups of researchers
who are working on the same project. Externally, R really has a
comparative advantage as that it can be scripted from a command line (a
terminal), can be used in combination with other languages (e.g., python
via rpy and C++ via rcpp to speed up procedures if needed) and works as
a charm in combination with both LaTeXÂ and html for creating
webpages.[^16]

## Python

Opposite to STATA and even R, Python is an open source general object
oriented programming language more in line with a language such as
C++.[^17] Python was implemented by Guido van Rossum in the late 1980's
and was built on the Modula-3 programming language. As it is a general
progamming language one needs several so-called packages in order to
make it work for econometrics in particular and data science in general,
most notably: NumPy, SciPy, Matplotlib and pandas.

Using Python for applied econometrics is not as straightforward as in
STATA but nowadays relatively similar to R using SciPy.[^18] A typical
regression routine looks as follows:

```python
import ols
mymodel = ols.ols(y,x,y_varnm,x_varnm)
mymodel_summary()
```

which is rather close to R, although the ols class from SciPy needs to
be loaded. The class is however not as general as the lm function from
R.

For an introductory econometrics course this might be too cumbersome.
However, the language itself is defined beautifully and **everything**
works similarly. So, once you get used to the seemingly cumbersome
approach of Python with respect to basic econometrics, other
functionalities requires far less investment in time, because the
grammar, style and approach is always consistent.[^19] Note, that this
is rather different from R which is far more chaotic in terms of
approaches, which might lead to the argument that Python is actually
simpler than R to learn because of its uniformity.

So, arguably the learning curve of Python is much steeper than that of
STATA or R. However, in the end it does pay off when learning the
language as it is not only a good language for learning programming, it
is as well very useful for projects just outside the realm of basic
econometrics. Working with strings (text analysis), images, spatial
data, API's, large amounts of data, etcetera, is all very common and
relatively straightforward in Python. Moreover, the community is very
large (larger than that of R). But, not all of them are working in data
science.

R and Python are often compared in their usefulness for statistical
research in particular and data science in general.[^20] The outcome is
still undecided. R has the killer applications but Python is catching up
fast. Python is perhaps faster and at least better scalable, so perhaps
should be considered for larger projects. One of Python benefits is that
it is a more general skill which could be applied for other tasks as
well. In any case, both of them are used very frequently outside
academia.

Finally, Python is perhaps even more scriptable than R and can be
combined with other languages as well. In terms of literature
programming, Python has interactive notebooks (now called Jupyter
notebooks) which are web applications where text and code can be run
interactively.

## Statistics in social science education 

Choosing which statistical package in academic tuition to be used is a
tough call---mostly because of limited course time available, possible
lock-in effects and vested interests in academic staff. And each of the
software packages reviewed above have their own pros and cons.

STATA is arguably the winner when it comes to applying basic
econometrics. However, it is not very flexible when it comes to
non-econometric statistics (e.g., statistical or machine learning
techniques), visualization and web interfaces. Moreover, it is not open
source.

R is slightly more cumbersome than STATA when it comes to basic
econometrics techniques, but it shines in flexibility, variety of
packages (of which some have become killer application status),
visualization support and interaction with other languages and
applications.

Python is the most cumbersome in dealing with basic econometrics, but
once learned the language can be used for a variety of applications and
together with packages such as pandas and SciPy it can accomplish most
tasks R can do but then in a more elegant, structured and consistent
manner.

In the end it depends on the education goal. If students in the end
should be able to apply 'straighforward' econometrics techniques, such
as diff-in-diff approaches as put forward by @angrist2008mostly, then
STATA definitely suffices (and more than that). If only STATA would be
open source.

However, if students need to be more flexible as in working with
geo-referenced data, application programming interfaces, bayesian
techniques, network analysis, more complex discrete choice models or
writing their own likelihood functions, then STATA does not suffice
anymore and should one, e.g., choose for R or Python. As perhaps
anecdotal evidence, but I have seen many PhD students move from STATA to
R as the former was not able to do anymore what they wanted.

As perhaps a final argument, R and especially Python skills are very
transferable to other languages and outside academia. Not only the
programming techniques, but as well working from command lines and
integrating several files in a reproducible manner, are skills that are
very useful, but unfortunately very missing as well.

## Concluding remarks 

What is often heard by students (and staff) is that they do not want to
be programmers but social sience researchers instead, and I acknowledge
that. My plea here is perhaps not to definitely choose for one of the
applications above, but for a more systematic thinking in the type of
research tools we teach our students and for trying to do so
consistently throughout the academic curriculum. Teaching an
introductory Python course, for example, and not using elements of that
course in later courses seems a definite waste of time. So, above all,
if STATA, Python or R is learned, let it come back in some form later at
least in every period. Most courses somehow do use data (if only to
create 3D pie charts).

Finally, by the audience at large there is now a greater need for
reproducibility. This requires teaching our students perhaps different
research tools and perhaps a different workflow when it comes to
empirical research. At least, greater emphasis should be put on revision
management, openness and scripting. Granted, some research tools are
better in this than others, but it typically is the combination of
research tools and the philosophy behind the set of research tools used
that is essential.

[^1]: There are some exceptions, see, e.g., @healy2011choosing and
    @Arribas-Bel2014misc for a workshop I gave together with Daniel
    Arribas-Bel.

[^2]: There is a difference between econometrics on the one hand and
    applied statistics (including the now very popular data science) on
    the other hand. Economics students first and foremost need to able
    to apply applied econometric techniques, such as presented in
    @stock2007introduction and perhaps later in @angrist2008mostly.

[^3]: I will also briefly touch upon some other packages, but these
    three mentioned are most likely the ones most used in economics,
    except of course for the ubiquitous Excel.

[^4]: There is and old saying that says that 80% of your research time
    goes in transforming data, while 20% is only spent on analysing the
    data.

[^5]: For a wonderful timelapse video on the nonlinearity and even
    sometimes chaos of writing a research paper, see this
    [link](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hNENiG7LAnc).

[^6]: I should mention the object oriented matrix language Ox as well,
    which is mostly used by econometricians. Because of the steep
    learning curve and relatively small community I will not consider it
    here, but I am aware of its popularity in some particular research
    groups.

[^7]: See [https://www.stata.com/](https://www.stata.com).

[^8]: I have to be careful though in making these sorts of statements.
    Usually, the popularity of software applications is researched by
    looking at search engine counts for jobs, frequently asked questions
    or counting popularity on the stackoverflow site
    (<https://stackoverflow.com/>). An interesting recent overview can
    be found on <http://r4stats.com/2017/06/19/scholarly-articles/>.

[^9]: Although the set of 'basic' procedures is quite extensive.

[^10]: Note that I do hesitate to drop the hype term 'big data' here.

[^11]: See <https://www.r-project.org/about.html>.

[^12]: See
    <http://blog.revolutionanalytics.com/2017/01/cran-10000.html>.

[^13]: Steep learning curves are in principle not problematic as it
    indicates that you learn rapidly and in the end the pay-off should
    be large. For 'quick and dirty' solutions, however, steep learning
    curves are problematic.

[^14]: Good examples are the margins package in R that has similar
    features as the very useful margins command in STATA and the plm
    package for implementing fixed effects.

[^15]: Fortunately, there is the great website [CRAN Task
    Views](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/) which gives good
    overviews of the most important packages in several subfields, such
    as dealing with spatial data, Bayesian inference, econometrics and
    mathematical programming.

[^16]: R has one of the best implementations of so-called literate
    programming via the package knitr. Literate programming as
    originally coined by @knuth1984literate indicates that output of
    coding and documentation are generated simultaneously. Whether or
    not this is a good idea for larger research projects, literate
    programming can be very useful for generating documentation of R
    packages, web blogs, teaching assignments and smaller research
    papers.

[^17]: See <https://www.python.org/>.

[^18]: Although there are some good tutorial texts to be found on
    internet, such as @sargent2015quantitative.

[^19]: For example, working with geospatial data by using the excellent
    [GeoPandas](http://geopandas.org/) package is then a breeze, which
    as a bonus might also obfuscates the need for using expensive and
    bloated GIS software applications.

[^20]: This seems another of these heavily disputed standard wars, such
    as the notorious [editor
    war](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Editor_war). A nice infographic
    of pros and cons of Python and R can be found
    [here](https://www.datacamp.com/community/tutorials/r-or-python-for-data-analysis).
